README.md, before:

# Optyx MVP Monorepo

Sprint 1: gateway proxy with API-key auth + OpenAI chat completions endpoint, dashboard for projects/keys/logs, Prisma/Postgres, Redis scaffold, pnpm workspaces, Turbo.

## Prerequisites
- Node 20+
- pnpm 8+
- Docker (for Postgres + Redis)

## Local setup
1) Copy envs and start infra
```
cp .env.example .env
docker-compose up -d
```
2) Install and generate Prisma client
```
pnpm install
pnpm prisma:generate
```
3) Apply migrations and seed
```
pnpm prisma:migrate:dev
pnpm prisma:seed
```
4) Run both apps
```
pnpm dev
```
Gateway: http://localhost:4000/health  
Dashboard: http://localhost:3000 (shows “Gateway OK” when the health call succeeds)

## Package scripts
- `pnpm dev` – run gateway + dashboard via Turbo
- `pnpm prisma:migrate:dev` / `pnpm prisma:migrate` – apply Prisma migrations (dev vs deploy)
- `pnpm prisma:seed` – seed 1 org + 1 user + 1 project (plus sample provider + billing rows)

## Project structure
- `apps/gateway` – Fastify service with `/health` + `/v1/chat/completions` proxy
- `apps/dashboard` – Next.js App Router dashboard (projects, keys, logs)
- `packages/shared` – shared TypeScript constants
- `prisma` – schema, migrations (`0001_init`, `0002_sprint1`), and seed script
- `docker-compose.yml` – Postgres + Redis for local dev

## Environment
Key variables (see `.env.example`):
- `DATABASE_URL` – Postgres connection (matches docker-compose)
- `GATEWAY_PORT` / `GATEWAY_HOST`
- `DASHBOARD_ORIGIN` – allowed origin for CORS
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_GATEWAY_URL` – used by the dashboard health check
- `OPENAI_API_KEY` – required for the gateway proxy
- `GOOGLE_API_KEY` – required for Google fallback + embeddings
- `OPTYX_FORCE_OPENAI_FAILOVER` – set to `1` to force FAST requests to use fallback (for testing)
- `REDIS_URL` – future use

## Usage
- Create a project and API key in the dashboard (`/projects` → create → open project → Generate key). Copy the key when shown; it is displayed once.
- Disable keys from `/projects/[id]/keys` when needed.
- View request activity in `/logs` (last 100 per project).
- Configure defaults and model allowlist in `/projects/[id]/settings`.
- If running `pnpm dev` (turbo), do not start the gateway separately on 4000. Use `PORT` to change the gateway port when needed.
- Gateway curl examples:
  1) FAST chat (default OpenAI) non-stream  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"hello from fast"}],"stream":false}'`
  2) SMART chat (OpenAI smart tier)  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "x-optyx-tier: smart" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"hello from smart"}],"stream":false}'`
  3) Streaming chat  
  `curl -N http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"model":"gpt-5-nano","messages":[{"role":"user","content":"Output exactly:\\nA\\nB"}],"stream":true,"max_tokens":64}'`
  4) Embeddings (defaults to Google embeddings)  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":"embedding text"}'`

## Sprint 2 verify
- Embeddings (string):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":"hello world"}'`
- Embeddings (array):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":["first","second"]}'`
- FAST chat (default OpenAI):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"fast tier"}]}'`
- SMART chat (`x-optyx-tier: smart`):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "x-optyx-tier: smart" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"smart tier"}]}'`
- Failover test (export `OPTYX_FORCE_OPENAI_FAILOVER=1` then run FAST chat):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"force fallback"}]}'`
- Streaming chat:  
  `curl -N http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"stream me"}],"stream":true}'`

## Local verification (Sprint 3)
- Health: `curl http://localhost:4000/health`
- Models: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/models`
- FAST chat default: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"hello"}]}'`
- SMART chat header: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "x-optyx-tier: smart" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"smart hello"}]}'`
- Embeddings batch: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":["a","b","c"]}'`
- Failover skipped (disabled in Sprint 3 by design)

### GPT-5 notes
- Legacy `max_tokens` is accepted for GPT-5 and mapped to `max_completion_tokens`. If the cap is too low and no text is produced, the gateway returns/streams an `OUTPUT_TRUNCATED` error (with a single `[DONE]` in streams). Increase `max_tokens` or lower reasoning effort to get text.

## CI
Basic GitHub Actions workflow at `.github/workflows/ci.yml` runs install, Prisma generate, and build.

Commit message:

Sprint 1: API keys + chat completions (streaming) + logs + dashboard

README.md, after:

# Optyx MVP Monorepo

Sprint 1: gateway proxy with API-key auth + OpenAI chat completions endpoint, dashboard for projects/keys/logs, Prisma/Postgres, Redis scaffold, pnpm workspaces, Turbo.

## Prerequisites
- Node 20+
- pnpm 8+
- Docker (for Postgres + Redis)

## Local setup
1) Copy envs and start infra
```
cp .env.example .env
docker-compose up -d
```
2) Install and generate Prisma client
```
pnpm install
pnpm prisma:generate
```
3) Apply migrations and seed
```
pnpm prisma:migrate:dev
pnpm prisma:seed
```
4) Run both apps
```
pnpm dev
```
Gateway: http://localhost:4000/health  
Dashboard: http://localhost:3000 (shows “Gateway OK” when the health call succeeds)

## Package scripts
- `pnpm dev` – run gateway + dashboard via Turbo
- `pnpm prisma:migrate:dev` / `pnpm prisma:migrate` – apply Prisma migrations (dev vs deploy)
- `pnpm prisma:seed` – seed 1 org + 1 user + 1 project (plus sample provider + billing rows)

## Project structure
- `apps/gateway` – Fastify service with `/health` + `/v1/chat/completions` proxy
- `apps/dashboard` – Next.js App Router dashboard (projects, keys, logs)
- `packages/shared` – shared TypeScript constants
- `prisma` – schema, migrations (`0001_init`, `0002_sprint1`), and seed script
- `docker-compose.yml` – Postgres + Redis for local dev

## Environment
Key variables (see `.env.example`):
- `DATABASE_URL` – Postgres connection (matches docker-compose)
- `GATEWAY_PORT` / `GATEWAY_HOST`
- `DASHBOARD_ORIGIN` – allowed origin for CORS
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_GATEWAY_URL` – used by the dashboard health check
- `OPENAI_API_KEY` – required for the gateway proxy
- `GOOGLE_API_KEY` – required for Google fallback + embeddings
- `OPTYX_FORCE_OPENAI_FAILOVER` – set to `1` to force FAST requests to use fallback (for testing)
- `REDIS_URL` – future use

## Usage
- Create a project and API key in the dashboard (`/projects` → create → open project → Generate key). Copy the key when shown; it is displayed once.
- Disable keys from `/projects/[id]/keys` when needed.
- View request activity in `/logs` (last 100 per project).
- Configure defaults and model allowlist in `/projects/[id]/settings`.
- If running `pnpm dev` (turbo), do not start the gateway separately on 4000. Use `PORT` to change the gateway port when needed.
- Gateway curl examples:
  1) FAST chat (default OpenAI) non-stream  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"hello from fast"}],"stream":false}'`
  2) SMART chat (OpenAI smart tier)  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "x-optyx-tier: smart" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"hello from smart"}],"stream":false}'`
  3) Streaming chat  
  `curl -N http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"model":"gpt-5-nano","messages":[{"role":"user","content":"Output exactly:\\nA\\nB"}],"stream":true,"max_tokens":64}'`
  4) Embeddings (defaults to Google embeddings)  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":"embedding text"}'`

## Local dev
- If port 4000 is free: `npm run dev`
- Recommended stable dev (gateway on 4001, dashboard points at it): `npm run dev:4001` (sets `GATEWAY_PORT=4001` and `NEXT_PUBLIC_GATEWAY_URL=http://localhost:4001`)
- If you see EADDRINUSE on 4000, another process is listening; Turbo will stop both apps. Find it with `lsof -nP -i :4000 -sTCP:LISTEN` (or :4001) and kill that PID.
- zsh globbing with `[DONE]`: always quote/escape patterns, e.g. `grep '\[DONE\]' file`.

## Sprint 2 verify
- Embeddings (string):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":"hello world"}'`
- Embeddings (array):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":["first","second"]}'`
- FAST chat (default OpenAI):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"fast tier"}]}'`
- SMART chat (`x-optyx-tier: smart`):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "x-optyx-tier: smart" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"smart tier"}]}'`
- Failover test (export `OPTYX_FORCE_OPENAI_FAILOVER=1` then run FAST chat):  
  `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"force fallback"}]}'`
- Streaming chat:  
  `curl -N http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"stream me"}],"stream":true}'`

## Local verification (Sprint 3)
- Health: `curl http://localhost:4000/health`
- Models: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/models`
- FAST chat default: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"hello"}]}'`
- SMART chat header: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/chat/completions -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "x-optyx-tier: smart" -d '{"messages":[{"role":"user","content":"smart hello"}]}'`
- Embeddings batch: `curl http://localhost:4000/v1/embeddings -H "Authorization: Bearer <KEY>" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"input":["a","b","c"]}'`
- Failover skipped (disabled in Sprint 3 by design)

### GPT-5 notes
- Legacy `max_tokens` is accepted for GPT-5 and mapped to `max_completion_tokens`. If the cap is too low and no text is produced, the gateway returns/streams an `OUTPUT_TRUNCATED` error (with a single `[DONE]` in streams). Increase `max_tokens` or lower reasoning effort to get text.

## CI
Basic GitHub Actions workflow at `.github/workflows/ci.yml` runs install, Prisma generate, and build.
